An autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) is a robot that travels underwater without requiring input 
from an operator. AUVs constitute part of a larger group of undersea systems known as unmanned 
underwater vehicles, a classification that includes non-autonomous remotely operated underwater 
vehicles (ROVs) – controlled and powered from the surface by an operator/pilot via an umbilical 
or using remote control. In military applications an AUV is more often referred to as an unmanned 
undersea vehicle (UUV). Underwater gliders are a subclass of AUVs.


Commercial
The oil and gas industry uses AUVs to make detailed maps of the seafloor before they start 
building subsea infrastructure; pipelines and sub sea completions can be installed in the most 
cost effective manner with minimum disruption to the environment. The AUV allows survey companies
 to conduct precise surveys of areas where traditional bathymetric surveys would be less 
effective or too costly. Also, post-lay pipe surveys are now possible, which includes pipeline
inspection. The use of AUVs for pipeline inspection and inspection of underwater man-made structures
 is becoming more common.


Research

A University of South Florida researcher deploys Tavros02, a solar-powered "tweeting" AUV (SAUV)
Scientists use AUVs to study lakes, the ocean, and the ocean floor. A variety of sensors can be 
affixed to AUVs to measure the concentration of various elements or compounds, the absorption or 
reflection of light, and the presence of microscopic life. Examples include 
conductivity-temperature-depth sensors (CTDs), fluorometers, and pH sensors. 
Additionally, AUVs can be configured as tow-vehicles to deliver customized sensor
 packages to specific locations.

The Applied Physics Lab at the University of Washington has been creating iterations of its Seaglider
 AUV platform since the 1950s. Though iRobot Seaglider was originally designed for oceanographic research,
 in recent years it has seen much interest from organizations such as the U.S. Navy or the oil and 
gas industry. The fact that these autonomous gliders are relatively inexpensive to manufacture and 
operate is indicative of most AUV platforms that will see success in myriad applications. [2]

An example of an AUV interacting directly with its environment is the Crown-Of-Thorns 
Starfish Robot (COTSBot), created by the Queensland University of Technology (QUT). This autonomous
 robot is able to identify the Crown-Of-Thorns Starfish (Acanthaster planci) using a neural network 
, which are harmful to the Great Barrier Reef, and inject the starfish with a lethal dose of bile salts, 
eradicating the threat.[3]

Air crash investigations
Autonomous underwater vehicles, for example AUV ABYSS, have been used to find wreckages of missing 
airplanes, e.g. Air France Flight 447,[13] and the Bluefin-21 AUV was used in the search for Malaysia 
Airlines Flight 370.[14]



The U.S. Navy Unmanned Undersea Vehicle (UUV) Master Plan[15] identified the following UUV's missions:

Intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
Mine countermeasures
Anti-submarine warfare
Inspection/identification
Oceanography
Communication/navigation network nodes
Payload delivery
Information operations
Time-critical strikes
The Navy Master Plan divided all UUVs into four classes:[16]


Vehicle designs
Hundreds of different AUVs have been designed over the past 50 or so years,[17] but only a few 
companies sell vehicles in any significant numbers. There are around 10 companies that sell AUVs
on the international market, including Kongsberg Maritime, Hydroid (now a wholly owned subsidiary
 of Kongsberg Maritime[18]), Bluefin Robotics, Teledyne Gavia (previously known as Hafmynd), 
International Submarine Engineering (ISE) Ltd, Atlas Elektronik, and OceanScan.[19]

Vehicles range in size from man portable lightweight AUVs to large diameter vehicles of over
 10 metres length. Large vehicles have advantages in terms of endurance and sensor payload capacity; 
smaller vehicles benefit significantly from lower logistics (for example: support vessel footprint;
launch and recovery systems).

Some manufacturers have benefited from domestic government sponsorship including Bluefin and Kongsberg. 
The market is effectively split into three areas: scientific (including universities and research agencies),
 commercial offshore (oil and gas, etc.) and military application (mine countermeasures, battle space preparation).
 The majority of these roles utilize a similar design and operate in a cruise (torpedo-type) mode. 
They collect data while following a preplanned route at speeds between 1 and 4 knots.

Commercially available AUVs include various designs, such as the small REMUS 100 AUV originally 
developed by Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in the US and now produced commercially by Hydroid, 
Inc. (a wholly owned subsidiary of Kongsberg Maritime[18]); the larger HUGIN 1000 and 3000 AUVs developed 
by Kongsberg Maritime and Norwegian Defence Research Establishment; the Bluefin Robotics 12-and-21-inch-diameter
 (300 and 530 mm) vehicles and the International Submarine Engineering Ltd. Most AUVs follow the traditional
 torpedo shape as this is seen as the best compromise between size, usable volume, hydrodynamic efficiency
 and ease of handling. There are some vehicles that make use of a modular design, enabling components to
 be changed easily by the operators.

The market is evolving and designs are now following commercial requirements rather than being purely 
developmental. Upcoming designs include hover-capable AUVs for inspection and light-intervention
 (primarily for the offshore energy applications), and hybrid AUV/ROV designs that switch between 
roles as part of their mission profile. Again, the market will be driven by financial requirements 
and the aim to save money and expensive ship time.

Today, while most AUVs are capable of unsupervised missions, most operators remain within range of
 acoustic telemetry systems in order to maintain a close watch on their investment. This is not always 
possible. For example, Canada has recently taken delivery of two AUVs (ISE Explorers) to survey the sea
 floor underneath the Arctic ice in support of their claim under Article 76 of the United Nations
 Convention of the Law of the Sea. Also, ultra-low-power, long-range variants such as underwater 
gliders are becoming capable of operating unattended for weeks or months in littoral and open ocean
 areas, periodically relaying data by satellite to shore, before returning to be picked up.

As of 2008, a new class of AUVs are being developed, which mimic designs found in nature. Although
 most are currently in their experimental stages, these biomimetic (or bionic) vehicles are able to 
achieve higher degrees of efficiency in propulsion and maneuverability by copying successful designs 
in nature. Two such vehicles are Festo's AquaJelly (AUV)[20] and the EvoLogics BOSS Manta Ray.[21]



Sensors
AUVs carry sensors to navigate autonomously and map features of the ocean. Typical sensors include 
compasses, depth sensors, sidescan and other sonars, magnetometers, thermistors and conductivity probes. 
Some AUVs are outfitted with biological sensors including fluorometers (also known as chlorophyll sensors),
 turbidity sensors, and sensors to measure pH, and amounts of dissolved oxygen.

A demonstration at Monterey Bay, in California, in September 2006, showed that a 21-inch 
(530 mm) diameter AUV can tow a 400 feet (120 m)-long hydrophone array while maintaining a 6-knot
 (11 km/h) cruising speed.[citation needed]



Navigation
Radio waves cannot penetrate water very far, so as soon as an AUV dives it loses its GPS signal. 
Therefore, a standard way for AUVs to navigate underwater is through dead reckoning. Navigation 
can however be improved by using an underwater acoustic positioning system. When operating within
 a net of sea floor deployed baseline transponders this is known as LBL navigation. When a surface 
reference such as a support ship is available, ultra-short baseline (USBL) or short-baseline (SBL)
 positioning is used to calculate where the sub-sea vehicle is relative to the known (GPS) position 
of the surface craft by means of acoustic range and bearing measurements. To improve estimation of 
its position, and reduce errors in dead reckoning (which grow over time), the AUV can also surface
 and take its own GPS fix. Between position fixes and for precise maneuvering, an Inertial Navigation 
System on board the AUV calculates through dead reckoning the AUV position, acceleration, and velocity.
 Estimates can be made using data from a Inertial Measurement Unit, and can be improved by adding a Doppler
 Velocity Log (DVL), which measures the rate of travel over the sea/lake floor. Typically, a pressure sensor
 measures the vertical position (vehicle depth), although depth and altitude can also be obtained from DVL
 measurements. These observations are filtered to determine a final navigation solution.




Propulsion
There are a couple of propulsion techniques for AUVs. Some of them use a brushed or brush-less electric
 motor, gearbox, Lip seal, and a propeller which may be surrounded by a nozzle or not. All of these parts 
embedded in the AUV construction are involved in propulsion. Other vehicles use a thruster unit to maintain 
the modularity. Depending on the need, the thruster may be equipped with a nozzle for propeller collision
 protection or to reduce noise submission, or it may be equipped with a direct drive thruster to keep the 
efficiency at the highest level and the noises at the lowest level. Advanced AUV thrusters have a redundant
 shaft sealing system to guarantee a proper seal of the robot even if one of the seals fails during the mission.

Underwater gliders do not directly propel themselves. By changing their buoyancy and trim, they repeatedly 
sink and ascend; airfoil "wings" convert this up-and-down motion to forward motion. The change of buoyancy
 is typically done through the use of a pump that can take in or push out water. The vehicle's pitch can be
 controlled by changing the center of mass of the vehicle. For Slocum gliders this is done internally by 
moving the batteries, which are mounted on a screw. Because of their low speed and low-power electronics, 
the energy required to cycle trim states is far less than for regular AUVs, and gliders can have endurances
 of months and transoceanic ranges.

Power
Most AUVs in use today are powered by rechargeable batteries (lithium ion, lithium polymer, nickel metal hydride etc.),
 and are implemented with some form of Battery Management System. Some vehicles use primary batteries which provide 
perhaps twice the endurance—at a substantial extra cost per mission. A few of the larger vehicles are powered by
 aluminum based semi-fuel cells, but these require substantial maintenance, require expensive refills and produce 
waste product that must be handled safely. An emerging trend is to combine different battery and power systems with
 supercapacitors.